Users/randyh/hiptests doc (#3676)
ROCm/rocm-systems: projects/hip-tests/README.md

©2026 Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

## Repository branches

The `rocm-systems/projects/hip-tests` repository maintains several branches. The branches that are of importance are:

* Main branch: This is the stable branch. It is up to date with the latest release branch, for example, if the latest release is rocm-7.2, main branch will be the repository based on this release.
* Develop branch: This is the default branch, on which the new features are still under development and visible. While this maybe of interest to many, it should be noted that this branch and the features under development might not be stable.

> * Release branches: These are branches corresponding to each ROCM release, listed with release tags, such as rocm-7.2, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Main branch: This is the stable branch. It is up to date with the latest release branch. For example, if the latest release is rocm-7.2, main branch will be the repository based on this release.
* Develop branch: This is the default branch, on which the new features are still under development and visible. While this may be of interest to many, it should be noted that this branch and the features under development might not be stable.
* Release branches: These are branches corresponding to each ROCM release, listed with release tags, such as rocm-7.2, etc.
```

## Building HIP Catch tests

> To build HIP from source, please check instructions on the [HIP page](https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/HIP/en/latest/install/build.html).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build HIP from source, review instructions on the [HIP page](https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/HIP/en/latest/install/build.html).  
```

```bash
  export ROCM_PATH=/opt/rocm # or the appropriate path for your installation
  echo $ROCM_PATH
```

1. Clone the `hip-tests` project as part of the `rocm-systems` repository, specifying the branch of interest. The default branch is `develop`, as an example:

```bash
  git clone -b release/rocm-rel-7.2 https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-systems.git
```

Alternatively, you can clone the hip-tests package separately using sparse-checkout as described in the [Contributing to](https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-systems/blob/develop/CONTRIBUTING.md) documentation. 

```bash
  git clone --no-checkout --filter=blob:none https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-systems.git
  cd rocm-systems
  git sparse-checkout init --cone
  git sparse-checkout set projects/hip-tests
  git checkout release/rocm-rel-7.2 # or the specific branch of interest
```

2. Set the `HIPTESTS_DIR` environment variable by running the following from outside the `hip-tests` folder: 

```bash
  export HIPTESTS_DIR="$(readlink -f hip-tests)"
  echo $HIPTESTS_DIR
```

### Build all HIP catch tests

```bash
  cd "$HIPTESTS_DIR"
  mkdir -p build; cd build

>   cmake ../catch/ -DHIP_PLATFORM=amd

Reviewer 2: Two options that I think should be mentioned here.
`-DCMAKE_HIP_COMPILER=amdclang++` I am not sure if it picks it up automatically.

`-DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=$HIP_PATH` It should default to /opt/rocm, but if user wants to build it with locally built hip, this is useful

  make -j$(nproc) build_tests
  ctest # run tests
```

HIP catch source files are found in `$HIPTESTS_DIR/catch`. Catch tests are built under the folder `$HIPTESTS_DIR/build/catch_tests`.

Note
---

To build catch tests with [Address Sanitizer](https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/llvm-project/en/latest/conceptual/using-gpu-sanitizer.html) options, use the cmake option `-DENABLE_ADDRESS_SANITIZER=ON`.

### Build HIP standalone catch tests

> HIP Catch2 supports compiling standalone tests using ``amdclang++`` for example:

Reviewer 2: This requires a bit more information, I think the process has changed again. tagging: @amilanov-amd

Reviewer 3: This process is a bit different currently, the steps are in projects/hip-tests/catch/README.md "Building a single test" section

```bash
  amdclang++ -D__HIP_PLATFORM_AMD__ -x hip ./catch/unit/memory/hipPointerGetAttributes.cc \
  -I ./catch/include ./catch/hipTestMain/standalone_main.cc -I ./catch/external/Catch2 \
  -I $HIP_PATH/include -L$HIP_PATH/lib -lamdhip64 -o hipPointerGetAttributes
```

Or using ``hipcc``:

```bash
  hipcc $HIP_TESTS_DIR/catch/unit/memory/hipPointerGetAttributes.cc -I ./catch/include \
  ./catch/hipTestMain/standalone_main.cc -I ./catch/external/Catch2 -o hipPointerGetAttributes
```

And then run the test:

```bash
  ./hipPointerGetAttributes
```

### Build Samples

> The CMakeLists.txt at hip-tests/samples folder can be used for building and packaging samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CMakeLists.txt file in the hip-tests/samples folder can be used to build and package samples.
```

CMakeLists.txt can support shared and static libs of hip-rocclr runtime. The same steps can be followed for both.

To build a specific sample (e.g. `0_Intro/bit_extract`) run:
```bash
$ cd samples/0_Intro/bit_extract
$ mkdir -p build && cd build
$ cmake ..
$ make all
```

> To build all samples together run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build all samples together, run:
```

```bash
$ cd hip-tests
$ mkdir -p build && cd build
$ rm -rf * # (to clear up)
$ cmake ../samples
$ make build_samples
```

In order to build specific samples (Intro, Utils or Cookbook) run:
```bash
$ make build_intro
$ make build_utils
$ make build_cookbook
```

Note that if you want debug version, add `-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug` in cmake cmd.

3. To package samples and generate packages. From hip-tests/build:
```bash
$ cmake ../samples
$ make package_samples
```

Note
---

> Sample `2_Cookbook/22_cmake_hip_lang` is current not included in top-level `cmake`. To build this sample from the top-level, uncomment Line 43 inside `samples/2_Cookbook/CMakeLists.txt`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sample `2_Cookbook/22_cmake_hip_lang` is not included in top-level `cmake`. To build this sample from the top-level, uncomment Line 43 inside `samples/2_Cookbook/CMakeLists.txt`.
```
